# Conclusion

This thesis presents the development of a new lattice design tool developed in the Python language and a new JSON-based lattice file format. The introduction outlines the technical obstacles physicists have to overcome during lattice development. Ranging from the problems of exchanging lattice files to the challenges of interfacing existing accelerator codes from a modern programming language, forcing physicists to write complicated and error-prone wrapper scripts.

Since Python has evolved to the lingua franca of the scientific community, it is an obvious candidate to form the basis of a new lattice design tool. In addition, the native interface to Python's ecosystem gives particle accelerator physics access to a large pool of scientific libraries, easy to integrate into lattice development workflows. While the capabilities at the moment are limited to linear beam dynamics, which corresponds only to a fraction of what mature accelerator physics codes like elegant or MAD-X are capable of, the developed code has been successfully used for several applications:

The Q5T2off optics presented in my bachelor's thesis was significantly improved. The $\beta$-beat outside the T2 section and its adjacent sections is negligible. The reduced vertical beta function in the center of the T2 section now clearly fulfills the requirements to avoid coupled bunch instabilities. Finally, a successful user acceptance test showed that the optics is ready for standard user operation.

In the context of an emittance exchange experiment, the BESSY II storage ring's optics was modified. First, the horizontal beta function was raised in the center of a triplet section to increase the influence of resonant skew excitation. Then, during the experiment, a second optics change was needed. The developed code was used throughout the same machine commissioning session to fit another optics where both beta functions were raised to 15 m in the center of the triplet section. While the experiment itself did not lead to the expected effect, it showed that the developed code is flexible enough to support a variety of lattice development tasks.

The developed code *apace* and the *LatticeJSON* lattice file format form the basis of a prove-of-concept framework to generate standardized lattice reports for a given set of lattice files. While much work still has to be done, automated routines to calculate the Twiss parameters using elegant @elegant, MAD-X @madx, or code developed for this thesis have been set up. The simulation results can be inspected via a website. The framework could be used to facilitate the lattice development of the BESSY II successor BESSY III, where many lattice candidates arise. Also, the framework could be used to create an updated version of the Synchrotron Light Source Data Book.

The new JSON-based lattice file format LatticeJSON can be considered a byproduct of this work. The goal was to create the most simple and straightforward lattice file format possible to make it easy to load the lattice data into every programming language. In contrary to other lattice files formats, the LatticeJSON format is a pure data format and does not support any constructs like variables, loops, or conditions. While, at the moment, only basic objects like drift sections, multipoles, cavities, or sub-lattices structures are supported, this is already sufficient to describe many accelerators. The simplicity of the format might not make it useable for every scenario, like for control system software, where additional configuration or the history of the magnet values is stored. However, its simplicity facilitates it to integrate it into other tasks. For example, the LatticeJSON format has proven helpful in transferring a new optics to the machine. To automate the process of calculating the new power supply values, the quadrupole strengths have to be extracted from the lattices files. Because the new lattice file format is JSON-based, which makes it trivial to extract values out of it, it was much easier than with the existing lattice file formats.

In conclusion, the code developed as part of this thesis will not replace the existing more mature and full-featured particle accelerator codes. However, it has shown how a modern lattice development workflow can look like and extends the ecosystem of accelerator tools by enabling fundamental lattice development using the Python language.
